you're giving talks about how CRT teens
aren't advantage or the apocalypse so
few disclaimers zero duties are strange
knowledge is bar logic encourage
learners on the academic papers are very
hard to understand there are very few
general purpose UNC libraries out there
and most people are very interested in
them but can barely understand them my
hope is that some of you might be
interested in implementing some but most
likely I want to I want to get people
interested in actually using them I do
have a library on hex called loom it's a
bit older but it supports the some of
the new Delta crd teas that are recent
and it works I have a new API that's
coming out soon but it won't be ready
for till Christmas probably now it's
ironic that the barriers understanding
this can be really high but they aren't
actually that complicated to do you just
have to be extremely precise about what
you're doing there's actually not that
much code involved it's just that it
can't be wrong at all
there's no almost in crd tease you will
corrupt your source of truth if you get
them wrong so what are crd T's
generically they're known as conflict
free replicated data types there are two
flavors one of them's commutative data
types and those are the log based ones
which you just keep a log of all the
updates that happen and you read over
the logs and apply the operations and
spit out a result and then there's once
called state-based which are a lot
easier to reason about but they they can
get very large and it's very hard to
it's very hard to ship very large dr
duties around they can lead to downtime
just like a garbage collection pause in
general you issue an update operation to
mutate the state of a crdt updates are
defined as being commutative associative
and idempotent there are exceptions to
this but generally people don't like to
talk about them crd T's are trivial to
communicate over a network the previous
properties are great because you can
always repeat a message send it five
times send stuff from the past send
stuff out of order and as long as the
latest messages are communicated you
will arrive at a consistent state once
everyone sees all the messages and in
general as long as you have reasonably
recent updates they all the answers from
all your different servers will be close
so they're very great for distributed
systems some of you saying I'm not
building the distributing system but you
are building a distributed system most
likely if you if you're involved in a
browser you're building a distributed
system the client expects things when
they interoperate with the user
interface and then when you save them
there is a disagreement between the what
the browser last saw and what's on the
server now someone else could have
edited something in the meantime and
frankly you are may
distributed system if you're making any
young web but even beyond that if you
are using elixir and Erlang processes
themselves unless you serialize
everything to a process a lot of the
properties of distributed systems are
within the beam itself you can't you
can't really have two processes an
identical state without tying them
together in such a strict way that they
might as well be serialized in one
process anyway so what are some common
crdt types that are around you've got
flags those are bullion's that are
either what there's a bug okay so flags
are bullying's that are either true or
false there are counters they go up or
down sets maintain maintain some list
there are registers which maintain one
thing most of the time some of them
retain more than one thing in special
cases there are maps which associate a
name or a term with a value map side the
interesting property that many of them
can nest crd t's a great thing about
that is that you can nest maps and maps
in most cases and you can create very
large rich objects that you can pass off
to the to another system and all of your
updates will be preserved pretty well
there are also graphs they help manage a
graph system though the semantics for
those get kind of wonky in some cases
and there are also crdt documents though
I would not look at using them at all
the storage requirements involved are
often ten times or more for
collaborative editing anyway they end up
being ten times more than the actual
space it takes to store the document and
it can get even worse if there's a lot
of concurrency
hmm okay so even though many application
properties can be built on CRT tease
there are kinds of application logic
that require strong coordination but you
can actually you can't actually get away
out with with a lot of contorting your
problem to fit into the the crdt itself
forging ahead without reading the
academic literature is currently a
mistake there's a lot of subtleties with
a lot of the libraries and you have to
understand how actors work and what a
unit of concurrency actually means in
the in the literature for you to
actually be able to understand most of
libraries they're not documented right
now to the point where you could just
pick them up and go I'm hoping the
change done eventually if you make crd
tease you must test them very heavily
and just because you get one hundred
percent code coverage does not mean
you've covered all the possible
interleaving which is the source of a
lot of different kinds of bugs I have
been bitten by this because in this kind
of system there's you can't out engineer
your way out of the problem OCR dt's
there's inefficiency already teased that
you can engineer your way out of but if
your properties have logical
contradictions in them you're up against
a mathematical certainty and it's just
hopeless I wasted six weeks so here's
some examples of some so you can
actually see kind of how they work i
wish i had a laser pointer but i
couldn't probably point anyway so
there's a G counter it counts up so
mostly most easily implemented as a
simple map single actor increments their
own ID in the map and the and when they
actors gonna let me take their own value
and
okay okay oh it's on oh okay it's a
laser pointer oh okay in each actor
messages all the others with their whole
counter and the maps are merged
duplicate entries by the same actor
resolve via an upper bound or max of
each actor value and that's generally
what it looks like let's see if I could
actually whoops point so here we're
adding one array is out adding one to
its counter then it adds two so it's
three here this is a communication down
here and you can see just the marriage
has both properties as the communication
goes on and what happens when there is
an out like say there was an out of
order message and this one was delivered
straight over here because you're taking
the maximum the red one could not
overwrite the red three the red three
would remain and so all of these
messages can arrived out of order in any
order and then at the end you just are
whenever you want to read the value you
sum up each individual item in the set
and you're done one of the most simple
kinds of CRT tease but there are some
problems that only goes up you can't go
down but you can get around this by
using two of them together 14 increments
and 14 decrements and then you subtract
one from the other this is called APN
counter this is the kind of contortions
you have to do in order to actually
maintain crdt properties and in a
real-life application so this is a girl
only set which is interesting if you
restrict set operations to only add sets
RCR DTS it's pretty simple if something
already exists it exists problem
obviously
you can't remove items from that list
easily if you think about having a
something similar to the pn counter with
the crdt you end up with a 2p set but
you can only remove an item once and
there's another variation where if you
when you remove an item you remove it
from the first set and then when you add
it again you can only riad at once and
then there's even more solutions using
tombstones of various kinds but they're
inflationary and you will never those
solutions that are inflationary they're
just voters grow unbounded as your
application life goes on and on there is
a way out it's called an hour slot which
is an observed remove set without
tombstones this is kind of complicated
so each of these are is the add
operation itself the interesting part
here happens when I take bread off the
list in this one's copy Reds back here I
removed the bees bread and then when I
merge back what happens is I ever for
every event I increment this counter and
each value is tagged with a counter and
if when I merge this with that in the
algorithm I check if they both should
have seen the update for bread because
they both did because they both didn't
see it only this one still sees it that
means that someone must have removed it
which means it can disappear from the
state forever and as long as I keep
these clocks consistent every event that
happens I add one to this clock and I
tag the values correctly I can add and
remove things that will and what you
have to do is you have to just decide on
a total order for add and remove there's
a add/remove wins and a and/or edwins
and remove wins and then when an ad wins
if there's a concurrent update that
things didn't see each other
the ad wins the day and if the remove
wins then remove one's a day pretty
straightforward so to explain a little
bit more this is kind of like a vector
clock but not really there's a slight
difference and I'll go over them really
quickly so that's what I explain each
value each actor has a value in time for
each event each actor starts at zero you
bump on each internal event you have to
bump the counter and you tag the value
in vector clocks you have to bump when
you prepare to send a message with
version vectors you don't and the word
dotted version vector just simply means
the tagging of the value and then of
course you send a copy of the clock and
every message so that you can actually
perform the logic of should this be in
both sets and if it is if it should be
in both sets and it isn't in both sides
you remove it this is a this is kind of
essential to getting the more intuitive
you to the way tombstone lyst stuff
works in CRT teas and this is from the
wikipedia page on vector clocks and it's
kind of amazing so relative to this dot
here everything here is in the past so
when i remove an element from a set
that's tagged in this blue area I know
it's not there because it is formed the
causation into here because we don't
really have a unified time everything is
actually based on causation it's not
time as a fiction basically especially
your multiple servers time can move
around on the server itself that's why
we just use numbers there's actually a
phenomenon called doom stones with the
tombstone varieties where if you use
wall clock time and the time is in the
future you won't be able to perform an
operation until the time gets past there
and if you set it really far in the
future it's just doomed everything after
here is an effect of what you're doing
and then everything we're not every
value is larger than the
other one or not every value smaller
than the other one these relationships
are concurrent operations and this is
even the case if something doesn't
communicate for three days it might have
happened two days ago it's still a
concurrent operation because they're not
causally related this is actually an
interesting property because in the set
cases we can actually perform some kind
of intuitive semantic kinds of reasoning
to create more complex types that the
user whenever they edit something and
they added separate fields both of those
edits will be preserved no it's a
partial ordering so everything is
ordered on each on each server but you
don't know the order between everything
else because it's all relative to where
you are as well because if we switch to
a different dot what the cause and
effects are going to be completely
different I already covered this yes yes
yeah the time the time scale is
completely different there's no unified
notion of time you have to just abandon
that illusion yes this this is just like
kind of like reasoning through
relativity officer the reason why the
word observation is used is that's what
happens is based on what you see and
there's some pseudo paradoxes with
Einstein's theory of relativity where
you can just kind of you get things that
seem like paradoxes never interesting I
went over that see ok so our so wats are
kind of a big deal I've abstract adem in
a library into something called a doc
colonel and I took that work from Carlos
Peguero who has a very amazing c++
implementation of crdt that is
simultaneously hard to read because of
all the single letter variables so
there's a feature called Delta crd T's
where you can actually take an empty
crdt kinda this is the kind of
methodology it's slightly different and
apply operations to those and instead of
using a dot context or o'clock you have
a dot cloud which is just the little
atomic pieces of the future that that
Delta represents and you can ship just
that Delta and if everything is actually
contiguous what will happen is you'll be
able to ship just a subset of your state
changes which is amazing it solves one
of the biggest drawbacks of state-based
co tt's there's another feature which is
incompatible but also desirable which is
upsetting
is we can actually support causation in
a very large nested crdt structure if we
share the context so if I were to pass
that context down through some nested
maps and then way back up I could
actually do a lot of reasoning about the
kinds of things that change and it would
be very easy to support very complex
data structures but it's not not easily
compatible with delta CRT T's at the
moment it might become easier if you
give up nested maps which I think might
be possible if with a graph but I
haven't thought enough about that at all
it takes about a week to get through one
of those papers for me you have to
translate it into English so how or why
can you use these these seem fairly
restrictive so one of the things I
really like about the elixir community
myself is a lot of the community values
where we want to be able to reach you
know people at a lower skill level not
only that but not only for that sake but
because when I don't have to think about
something I can focus all my mental
energy on something actually hard that
i'm interested in CR dt's really should
be a means and not an ends so a lot of
times you'll hear I know how to solve my
problem I know I can solve my problems
using a crdt but i have no idea how to
do that all the current crdt adapters a
lot of them seem to only use them when
faced with strong external pressures
like the fact that they can't fit all
the data on one machine the amount of
English in the talk from SoundCloud
about how they implemented an observer
move set without tombstones they
implemented a remove winds version of
that and they were very pained at having
to implement this and they actually
implemented in Lua on top of Redis so
they didn't have to do they had they
would have to do the least amount
possible and they would use Redis
operations I think to actually send the
updates
I think the status quo on this can be
broken one of the strategies is
Christopher Michael Johns last but we I
think there's some also some other use
cases we can get some really quick wins
on that aren't necessarily the most
efficient but will work in most people's
use cases but some of the solutions will
require rich client contacts like single
page applications native apps etc you're
going to have to keep track of state in
the client and apply updates yourself
for some of them more complicated and
nicer things but the nice part is is you
can actually defer your updates and
apply operations locally on the device
or in the single page application and
not wait for a response from the server
to get a source of truth so you can
actually make very fast progress within
the application it's a big benefit so
here's actually one of the easy wins
that I thought about a week ago and I've
been impressed with ever since because
it just blew my mind so we can create
some ecto support for CRT's where we add
a crdt field it kind of works I kind of
took inspiration from the optimistic
optimistic locking support inept Oh so
what this actually does is it creates an
optimistic lock that can retry and
reapply operations in the face of
conflict for ecto and into the database
and so basically in basically how it
works probably easiest about this line
so we add a crdt and we just by narrated
tournament code and we sign it with an h
mac so no one can edit it stick it in an
hidden field in a form and in phoenix we
can when the user submits the form we
can dip the new values from the old ones
in the crdt when it's backed up to the
server and the co TT might have changed
in the database but we're using the copy
that's submitted with the user what
happens after that is we can do a diff
find the differences extract operations
and apply them back on the crdt that
sounds complicated but what we get is
whenever we
the third statement there is the update
that's an optimist lock update where if
the constraint is violated we actually
fail to insert so you can't actually
insert your new values if someone else
did it between your old crdt and the
current one but you can do is select the
conflicting row merge the crd tease and
reapply it so imagine a very simple case
where you're really lazy and you don't
want to think about anything and you
just add last right wins to every single
field you might think that this is kind
of trivalent trivial and useless but you
can have a very large table in a very
large form with a lot of different
fields and someone might only edit two
or three someone else might edit three
or four and what will happen with the
last right wins context is that you
preserve both sets of rights because the
things that didn't change won't conflict
and there's actually if you want to do
more work you can't do this in the easy
contacts you can actually do a little
bit of JavaScript logic and use
something called a multivalued register
we're on conflict that will preserve
both and then you can pull out the
latest one and prompt the user to
actually pick one that might have
conflicted with them at some later point
in time so you can still preserve some
of this stuff and keep it in the very
simple very simple state and what what's
really great about this is if I go back
I'm still preserving on my field so I
can still run complex select queries I
don't give up anything I can still do
all the stuff I want to do the only
thing I can't do is just insert directly
without touching the crdt everything
else though with select statements and
complex reporting I get that and it is
great so those are some good short-term
goals for me I'm hoping to have that
stuff working by Christmas medium-term
goals can we do agent lattices an agent
crdt which is from jose's talk I think
at Erling user conference we can kind of
do that kinda
so let's see a lot of the crd tease only
become really possible though whenever
we actually have more cooperation
because elixir is so locked in on the
server and we don't really have elixir
iphone apps yet we're actually going to
need to rely on some other technologies
to catch up before we can really take
off with crd tease so things on my wish
list that we really really need I need I
I really want a good gossip protocol
that's freed from another earling
project and doesn't have really complex
dependencies I don't want to include an
entire project just to get its casa
protocol an external representation for
these crdt types is really important and
really difficult to reason about because
they don't fit neatly into Jason and a
lot of the other nicer stuff nicer
serialization formats they don't really
have much by in so we might have to
implement something on top of Jason that
we would just run a quick map over and
be able to transform that into something
we can use like I said other language
support is going to be required to use
some of these crdt properties and larger
systems because we're all making very
heterogeneous systems I think one of the
easy wins might actually be library
support particularly ember and react and
actually graphic you all would be a
great way to do things because you can
include the crdt context with your
updates and you can actually apply
instead of inferring the events you can
actually apply events directly from the
user and be in the state if if they're
well tested the state is going to be
well guarded having the browser be a lot
more stateful it's a lot safer when
you're whenever you're in crdt land so
why are they the data types for the
apocalypse so
this is yeah I work for some short
period of time in in emergency
operations not an emergency operation
center but I was working with a vendor
who sold stuff to emergency operation
centers the stuff they use and the stuff
that contract out is held together with
duct tape it's very poor the interfaces
look like they're about 15 years old and
probably are I don't think any of the I
don't think many of the vendors at all
higher permanent programmers except just
to support the new version of Windows
they don't really communicate well they
assume your emergency operation center
is online and if you remember during
Hurricane Katrina and I've read some of
the retrospectives recently there's been
ish that one of the biggest issues was
there was no communication this the cell
phone networks are down and they would
send someone out to go find what would
happen and it would disappear for two
three four days while they were helping
solve problems but none of the
decision-makers up the tree knew what
was happening on the ground just people
would disappear New Orleans which is
like a black hole that would just suck
in volunteers and government officials
and no one would see them for three or
four days and you can't make decisions
on what the provision and send in if you
don't know what they need one use case
that would be really great is once you
have er DTS on the phone you can
communicate peer-to-peer if you're
worried about security you can sign
everything with CA certificates and
there's a certificate chain you can
solve that these are things that we can
go grab libraries off the shelf the
missing part is actually the crd tees
and not many languages actually have
them and they're one of the ways that we
could probably save people a lot of pain
we lose a lot of our technological
advantage when a natural disaster
happens because a lot of the stuff we
use to automate logistics just relies so
heavily on technology and not many
people are actually trying to make this
work and a disconnected state and the
ones that do I mean we see how many of
you have phone apps where you do
something on the phone and you have the
browser app
and nothing matches up you have to sink
and sometimes you have to close the
browser sink and then like relog in to
just see the updates so I think CRT's
can provide a lot of serious value and I
hope you're tempted to use them you get
a lot of resiliency and speed and you
can defer synchronization for days on
some of the models to where there's not
even a business case for you know if
you've only got like 50 or 60 people in
your organization and no one
communicates for a week and then
everyone comes into the office and
everyone crdt sync up together you know
there's only a very few conflicts that
you have to work through and everything
works fine and you don't even have to
worry about real kinds of consistency
issues you can just wait a week or two
also helps network connect the apps that
want to work on the subway where you
might want to authenticate against the
server for login but once you have that
for a while you want to be able to let
users apply operations locally and
always remain and always have those
edits be able to sync up even if they
someone else or they have done something
in the browser and I could also use help
pull requests and discussions are
welcome I can talk about this stuff for
a very long time some people here
probably already realize that so here's
some really interesting people and work
that you can look up Lindsey Cooper does
a lot of really interesting reasoning
one of the things like i actually
discovered reading some of her blog post
was you can actually apply what's called
inflationary inflationary updates
without actually doing any
synchronization and you don't need to
preserve the commutative and associative
properties of your updates so one
example would be in the Phoenix presence
say you want to protect against join
floods and you're sinking all the
server's every two or three seconds and
so what you can do is when our user
joins you have a local set that you can
add and remove from naively and then
when the
three seconds are up you collapse all
those and merge them into the crdt set
as an operation if someone joins the
channel 10 times and leaves channel 10
times what happens is all those events
get collapsed down by adding removing to
just that set to at most one and so at
most once they'll be able to flood the
channel with a join or leave message
which is a really great property and so
I've heard a thing for that christopher
michael john he has a about twice a year
so he publishes all the papers on CRT
teas that every that are going around in
academia carlos peguero i'm really
indebted to him for the hour SWAT stuff
he's really pushed that far the react ET
source is really interesting that's
reacts data types that's the other main
inspiration for the current library
that's in hex called loom and this is a
summary paper that goes in a lot more
detail and while they have a lot of
Greek Greek letters and everything they
also have really good diagrams in the
paper and that's pretty much it